---
title: XANES example
parent: Examples
nav_order: 10
permalink: /examples/xanes-example/
math: katex
---

# XANES Example

This example demonstrates a complete workflow for processing XANES data using EstraPy. It covers:

1. Directory setup and data loading
2. Basic data cleaning and normalization
3. Pre-edge and post-edge fitting
4. Noise estimation
5. Final plotting and export

## 1. Directory Setup and Data Loading

The tutorial assumes a rigid directory structure for organizing raw and processed data. EstraPy never modifies raw files, and is designed to be fast enough to be frequently re-run as you adjust parameters.

Therefore, we recommend a clean separation between raw data and processing outputs.

<pre>
    <code class="language-tree">
.
├── <span class="folder">analysis</span>           <span class="comment"># Analysis folder (contains EstraPy projects and outputs)</span>
│   ├── <span class="file">xanes.estra</span>    <span class="comment"># EstraPy project file</span>
│   │
│   └── <span class="folder">xanes</span>          <span class="comment"># Output folder generated by EstraPy</span>
│       └── <span class="file">xanes.log</span>
│
└── <span class="folder">data</span>               <span class="comment"># Raw data directory (contains original data files)</span>
    ├── <span class="file">scan_01.xy</span>     <span class="comment"># Raw data files (never modified by EstraPy)</span>
    :
    └── <span class="file">scan_09.xy</span>
    </code>
</pre>

In this structure:

- The `data` folder contains all raw data files (e.g. `scan_01.xy`, `scan_02.xy`, ..., `scan_09.xy`). These files are never modified by EstraPy.
- The `analysis` folder contains the EstraPy project file (`xanes.estra`). Once the .estra file is run, it generates a subfolder `xanes` where all processed data, logs, images and outputs are stored.
This separation allows you to freely re-run the .estra file, adjusting parameters as needed, without worrying about overwriting raw data.

### 1.1. Data structure

Let's first examine the structure of the raw data files. Each file is a text file with a number of header lines (starting with `#`) followed by columns of data.
In this case, this is the head of one of the files:
```csv
# Sample: Fe2O3
# Edge: Fe K-edge

```

To load the data, we start by creating a new EstraPy project and adding the raw files:

```sh
# version {{ site.version }}

# Let's give a title to the project
%title "XANES Analysis Example"


# Read the input files. The path supports relative paths
# (relative to the .estra file) and glob patterns.
filein "data/scan_*.xy"
```
